# Bazel JVM Porting Guide

This document explains how to port an existing JVM project (Java or Scala)
to Bazel.

If you are not intending to port a project to Bazel but rather use Bazel on an
already ported project, then please refer to the [Bazel User
Guide][bazel_user_guide].

This guide assumes familiarity with Bazel's core concepts and a functioning
Bazel setup. If you are not yet familiar with Bazel, need a refresher, or need
to setup Bazel, please refer to the [Bazel User Guide][bazel_user_guide].

[bazel_user_guide]: ./BAZEL.md

This guide is based on the experience of porting an SBT project to Bazel.  If
you are not porting an SBT project but a Maven project instead, then you should
also have a look at the Maven porting guide in the [official Bazel
documentation][bazel_maven_guide]. However, in order to arrive at a homogenous
build system and project structure you shuold follow the suggestions in this
guide where possible.

[bazel_maven_guide]: https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/migrate-maven.html

The structure of this guide is as follows: First, we describe how to define
external dependencies to your project in Bazel. This includes additional Bazel
rules that you may need to import from external workspaces, Maven JAR
dependencies, or other artifacts that need to be fetched from Artifactory.
Then, we describe how to build a JVM project with Bazel. This covers the
project structure, in particular when coming from SBT, and the details of
defining Java and Scala targets in Bazel. In the very end we talk about the
Java runtime and toolchain that Bazel uses and provide links to Bazel API
documentation.


## External Dependencies

External dependencies are targets that your project depends on, but that are
not built, or otherwise generated, within the local workspace. Such external
dependencies are defined in the `WORKSPACE` file or in Bazel macros that are
called from the `WORKSPACE` file.

### Bazel Dependencies

Bazel can be extended with custom rules, for example to support languages for
which Bazel provides no builtin rules. Extensions that are defined outside the
current workspace can be included from an external workspace. Bazel provides
the workspace rules `http_archive`, `get_repository`, or `local_repository` in
order to define an external workspace. Refer to the [official
documentation][bazel_workspace_rules] for details. An example is presented in
the Scala section below.

[bazel_workspace_rules]: https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/workspace.html#workspace-rules

#### Java

Bazel has builtin support for Java. No external workspaces need to be imported
to support Java projects at the time of writing.

#### Scala

Bazel does not have builtin Scala support. In this repository we use
[`rules_scala`][rules_scala], which defines Bazel rules to build Scala projects.
First, we need to import the external workspace:

```
http_archive(
  name = 'io_bazel_rules_scala',
  url = 'https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_scala/...',
  ...
)
```

This will make `rules_scala` available under the label
`@io_bazel_rules_scala//`. Next, we define the exact version of the Scala
compiler and core libraries to use:

```
load('@io_bazel_rules_scala//scala:scala.bzl', 'scala_repositories')
scala_repositories(("2.12.6", {
    "scala_compiler": "3023b07cc02f2b0217b2c04f8e636b396130b3a8544a8dfad498a19c3e57a863",
    "scala_library": "f81d7144f0ce1b8123335b72ba39003c4be2870767aca15dd0888ba3dab65e98",
    "scala_reflect": "ffa70d522fc9f9deec14358aa674e6dd75c9dfa39d4668ef15bb52f002ce99fa"
}))
load('@io_bazel_rules_scala//scala:toolchains.bzl', 'scala_register_toolchains')
scala_register_toolchains()
```

If you need to update the Scala version, make sure to also update the
corresponding SHA-256 hashes in hexadecimal encoding. The hashes can be looked
up in the [Artifactory repository browser][artifactory_browser_hash] in the
very bottom of the "General" pane.

See the [`rules_scala` setup guide][rules_scala_setup] for further details.

[rules_scala]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_scala
[rules_scala_setup]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_scala#getting-started
[artifactory_browser_hash]: https://digitalasset.jfrog.io/digitalasset/webapp/#/artifacts/browse/tree/General/jcenter-cache/org/scala-lang/scala-reflect/2.12.6/scala-reflect-2.12.6.jar

### Maven JAR Dependencies

Next, we consider the most common case of Maven JARs which are distributed on
Artifactory. We distinguish direct and transitive dependencies. Direct
dependencies are explicitly defined on targets in the local workspace.
Transitive dependencies are introduced implicitly as dependencies of direct
dependencies. It is preferable to only have to define direct dependencies and
let a dependency resolver determine all transitive dependencies.

The tool [`bazel-deps`][bazel-deps] can read a list of direct Java and Scala
JAR dependencies and then use [Coursier][coursier] to perform dependency
resolution and generate the whole transitive closure of dependencies. The
`dev-env` provides a modified version of `bazel-deps` that supports Artifactory
authentication as required at Digital Asset.

Please do not execute `bazel-deps` directly. Instead, use the
`update-bazel-deps` tool provided in the dev-env. Make sure to check-in the
resulting files into revision control.  

Direct dependencies are manually defined in the file `dependencies.yaml` at the
repository root. The generated Bazel definitions are written to the `3rdparty`
directory in the repository root. The file `3rdparty/workspace.bzl` lists the
individual JAR dependencies and the directory tree under `3rdparty/jvm` defines
Bazel targets for them. Only Bazel targets for direct dependencies are publicly
visible. The Bazel targets include `exports` attributes to capture indirect
dependencies.

The file `3rdparty/workspace.bzl` defines Bazel macros that must be called in
the `WORKSPACE` file in order to import the external JAR dependencies.

```
load("//3rdparty:workspace.bzl", "maven_servers", "maven_dependencies")
maven_servers()
maven_dependencies()
```

First, we call `maven_servers` which will define the list of repositories from
which to fetch JARs. These are listed in the definition of `list_servers` in
`3rdparty/workspace.bzl`. For example:

```
{"name": "central", "url": "https://digitalasset.jfrog.io/digitalasset/libs-release"},
```

The name of each server must match the id of the corresponding entry in the
Maven `settings.xml` file for authentication to work. Second, we call
`maven_dependencies` which defines the individual JAR dependencies using the
Bazel builtin `maven_jar` rule.

The file `dependencies.yaml` consists of three sections `options`,
`dependencies`, `replacements`. Their structure is as follows:

- `options`:
    This section configures the dependency resolution process and the generated
    Bazel definitions.

    - `buildHeader`:
        A list of lines of Bazel code to insert at the top of each generated
        `BUILD` file underneath `3rdparty/jvm`.

    - `languages`:
        A list of languages used. Currently supports `java` and `scala`.
        The `scala` entry can specify the language version e.g. as
        `"scala:2.12.6"`.

    - `resolverType`:
        A string specifying the resolver, either `coursier` or `aether`.
        Only `coursier` supports authentication at the time of writing.

    - `resolvers`:
        A list of repositories to query for dependency resolution.
        Each entry has the following fields.

        - `id`:
            A string that must match the corresponding entry in Maven's
            `settings.xml`.

        - `url`:
            A string describing the repository URL.

        - `credentials`:
            An optional string describing the environment variable prefix
            under which the authentication credentials for this repository
            are defined. Given a value of `PREF` credentials will be looked
            up in `PREF_USER` and `PREF_PASSWORD`.

            Use `DA_JFROG` for a repository under
            `https://digitalasset.jfrog.io/digitalasset`. The `bazel-deps`
            wrapper in the dev-env will provide Artifactory credentials in
            the corresponding environment variables.

- `dependencies`:
    This section configures the direct JAR dependencies.
    Entries take the following shape:

    ```
    <group id>:
      <artifact id>:
        lang: <language>
        version: <version>
    ```

    For example:

    ```
    com.typesafe.scala-logging:
      scala-logging:
        lang: scala
        version: "3.5.0"
    ```

    A group can hold multiple artifacts.

    In case of Scala dependencies, this will perform the corresponding name
    mangling to include the Scala version into the Maven coordinate. If you
    wish to avoid this you can use the language value `scala/unmangled`. For
    example:

    ```
    org.mongodb:
      casbah-commons_2.12.0-RC1:
        lang: scala/unmangled
        version: "3.1.1"
    ```

    Maven coordinates map to Bazel targets in the following form:

    ```
    //3rdparty/jvm/<group path>:<artifact name>
    ```

    Where `<group path>` is `<group id>` with `.` replaced by `/` and special
    characters (like `-`) replaced by `_`, and `<artifact name>` is
    `<artifact id>` with special characters (like `-` or `.`) replaced by `_`.

    For example

    ```
    com.typesafe.scala-logging:scala-logging
    -> //3rdparty/jvm/com/typesafe/scala_logging:scala_logging

    org.mongodb:casbah-commons_2.12.0-RC1
    -> //3rdparty/jvm/org/mongodb:casbah_commons_2_12_0_RC1
    ```

    The above Bazel targets are wrappers that capture indirect dependencies and
    should be used for regular library dependencies.

    The naked JAR targets are available under labels of the following form:

    ```
    //external:jar/<group path>/<artifact name>
    ```

    These are used in cases were individual JAR files need to be provided. For
    example for Scala compiler plugins.

- `replacements`:
    This section allows to override regular dependency resolution for certain
    Maven artifacts and instead point to specific Bazel targets.
    Entries take the following shape:

    ```
    <group id>:
      <artifact id>:
        lang: <language>
        target: <Bazel target>
    ```

    For example:

    ```
    org.scala-lang:
      scala-compiler:
        lang: scala/unmangled
        target: "@io_bazel_rules_scala_scala_compiler//:io_bazel_rules_scala_scala_compiler"
    ```
    
    The standard use-case are the Scala core libraries (`scala-compiler`,
    `scala-library`, `scala-reflect`) which have to match the compiler
    toolchain. Another use-case are Maven packages that `bazel-deps` does not
    support, e.g. POM packages. Examples of both can be found in
    `dependencies.yaml`. Custom replacement targets are defined in
    `replacements/BUILD.bazel`.

For a more detailed explanation of the `dependencies.yaml` file format please
refer to the [project README][bazel-deps-readme].

The Bazel code that `bazel-deps` generates uses Bazel's builtin [`maven_jar`
workspace rule][maven_jar]. It supports specifying JAR and source SHA1 hashes
to ensure reproducibility. By default `bazel-deps` will populate the
attributes. The builtin `maven_jar` rule also supports specifying the Maven
server that provides the artifact. `bazel-deps` will specify the corresponding
`resolvers` entry in `dependencies.yaml` under which it found the artifact.
The `server` attribute must match the `id` in the Maven `settings.xml` for
authentication to work. A corresponding `maven_server` rule must have been
defined before.

`bazel-deps` generates calls to Bazel's builtin [`maven_server` workspace
rule][maven_server] for every resolver specified in the `dependencies.yaml`
file. By default authentication credentials will be looked up in Maven's
configuration file `~/.m2/settings.xml`. This default can be overriden by
setting the `settings_file` attribute. This is used on Jenkins CI to inject
Artifactory credentials.

[bazel-deps]: https://github.com/johnynek/bazel-deps
[coursier]: https://github.com/coursier/coursier
[bazel-deps-readme]: https://github.com/johnynek/bazel-deps#dependencies
[maven_jar]: https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/workspace.html#maven_jar
[maven_server]: https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/workspace.html#maven_server

#### Conflicting Dependencies

Following the goal of HEAD based development all projects should strive to
share common dependencies in one place, such as `dependencies.yaml` for JAR
dependencies. If different projects have conflicting dependencies, then these
conflicts should be fixed so that both projects can share the same common
dependencies.

A valid exception to this rule are external tools that are defined in Bazel and
used for build or development. These may have conflicting dependencies with the
projects in this repository and changing their code to rectify these conflicts
may be out of scope or infeasible.

In such a case a separate dedicated `dependencies.yaml` file and `3rdparty`
directory tree can be created. See `bazel_tools/scalafmt/dependencies.yaml` for
an example. Make sure to adjust `dev-env/bin/update-bazel-deps` accordingly,
execute it to perform dependency resolution, and check-in the resoluting files.

## Building a Project with Bazel

Recall, that a Bazel workspace consists of packages and targets. A package is a
directory that contains a `BUILD.bazel` file. A `BUILD.bazel` file can define
rule targets. Additionally, regular files underneath a package are targets as
well.

### Project Structure

When structuring a Bazel project you should strive for small targets and small
packages. Bazel's incremental builds will work best when targets are as small
as possible. Additionally, you should make target visibility as tight as
possible in favour of a clean dependency graph.

If you are porting a JVM component in the `da` repository it is likely that you
will be coming from an SBT project structure similar to the following.

```
da
├── WORKSPACE
└── my_component
    ├── build.sbt
    ├── module1
    │   ├── build.sbt
    │   └── src
    │       ├── main
    │       │   └── scala
    │       │       └── com/digitalasset/module
    │       │           ├── Main.scala
    │       │           ⋮
    │       └── test
    │           └── scala
    │               └── com/digitalasset/module
    │                   ├── SomeSpec.scala
    │                   ⋮
    ├── module2
    │   ├── build.sbt
    ⋮   ⋮
    └── project
        ⋮
```

In this case `da/my_component/build.sbt` defines properties of the whole
component and the interdependencies between the modules (subprojects in SBT).
The files `da/my_component/moduleX/build.sbt` define properties of a particular
module, and its external dependencies. Finally, the folder
`da/my_component/project` contains additional files defining further properties
of the component, SBT plugins, etc.

SBT associates tasks with a project, such as `compile` or `test`. It is then
possible to specify dependencies only for certain tasks. E.g. test-only
dependencies. Furthermore, if `module2` depends on `module1`, then `module2`'s
tests can depend on test classes defined in `module1`.

In Bazel things are structured differently. A library, a test-only library, or
a test-suite are all separate Bazel targets. Dependencies are defined at each
individual target. Repetition can be reduced by transitive dependencies or by
giving a name to a list of targets and assigning that list as a dependency

Bazel is not extended by a plugin mechanism like SBT plugins. Instead Bazel is
extended by user defined rules or macros. It is not often the case that one has
to define custom rules or macros. In most cases existing ones can be reused.

#### Fine Grained Bazel Project Structure

As mentioned before one should strive for as small Bazel targets as possible.
Translated to Bazel the above project might take the following form:

```
da
├── WORKSPACE
└── my_component
    ├── BUILD.bazel
    ├── module1
    │   ├── BUILD.bazel
    │   └── src
    │       ├── main
    │       │   └── scala
    │       │       └── com/digitalasset/module
    │       │           ├── BUILD.bazel
    │       │           ├── Main.scala
    │       │           ⋮
    │       └── test
    │           └── scala
    │               └── com/digitalasset/module
    │                   ├── BUILD.bazel
    │                   ├── SomeSpec.scala
    │                   ⋮
    └── module2
        ├── BUILD.bazel
        ⋮
```

Here `da/my_component/moduleX/src/.../BUILD.bazel` would define small library,
test, and executable targets. `da/my_component/moduleX/BUILD.bazel` would
bundle these small targets into larger ones to make module interdependencies
easier to manage. Finally, `da/my_component/BUILD.bazel` would bundle the
module targets to ease management of component interdependencies or component
release.

#### Coarse Grained Intermediate Bazel Project Structure

However, coming from SBT such a fine grained structure may not immediately be
possible without change in the corresponding Java or Scala code. For example
due to cyclic dependencies between larger sets of source files. In this case
the following structure can be used as an intermediate step:

```
da
├── WORKSPACE
└── my_component
    ├── BUILD.bazel
    ├── module1
    │   ├── BUILD.bazel
    │   └── src
    │       ├── main
    │       │   └── scala
    │       │       └── com/digitalasset/module
    │       │           ├── Main.scala
    │       │           ⋮
    │       └── test
    │           └── scala
    │               └── com/digitalasset/module
    │                   ├── SomeSpec.scala
    │                   ⋮
    └── module2
        ├── BUILD.bazel
        ⋮
```

Here, `da/my_component/moduleX/BUILD.bazel` defines targets for what was
previously an SBT subproject. Note, that a single SBT project will already
separate into multiple Bazel targets at this step. Notably, regular library
targets and test-only library targets will be separate. Test-cases should be
made as small targets as possible at this stage already. Bazel test-suite
macros (see below) should be used to reduce boilerplate.

### Java Targets

This section will outline how to define common Java targets. Please refer to
the [Bazel API documentation][bazel-api-documentation] for further details.

#### Libraries

Java libraries can be defined using the builtin `java_library` rule. It will
generate a JAR file containing the compiled Java classes and a source JAR
containing the input Java sources. For example:

```
java_library(
    name = "example",
    # JAR dependencies for compiletime and runtime classpath
    deps = [
        "//some/package:some_target",
        ":some_local_target",
        ...
    ],
    # JAR dependencies for runtime class path only
    runtime_deps = [ ... ],
    # JAR dependencies that should be forwarded to anything that depends on this target.
    exports = [ ... ],
    # Java source files
    srcs = glob(["src/main/java/.../my_component/**/*.java"]),
    # Resource files
    resources = glob(["src/.../resources/**"]),
    # Keep target visibility tight.
    visibility = ["//current_component:__pkg__"],
)
```

#### Tests

Java tests can be defined using the builtin `java_test` rule. It will generate
an executable wrapper around the given test code that executes the test
runner's main method. Test targets can be executed using the `bazel test`
command.

Bazel can cache test results, which can greatly reduce test-suite execution
time. For maximum benefit test targets should be made as small as possible,
ideally a single Java source file.

Use the `java_test_suite` macro to automatically define one test target for
every given source file and bundle them in one test-suite target. If test-cases
depend on utility classes defined in other Java sources, then you should define
a Java library target for these utility classes and let the test targets depend
on this library.

For example:

```
load('//bazel_tools/java_testing:java_test_suite.bzl', 'java_test_suite')

test_utils = glob(["src/test/java/.../utils/**/*.java"])

java_library(
    name = "test-utils",
    srcs = test_utils,
    ...
)

java_test_suite(
    name = "tests",
    srcs = glob(
        ["src/test/java/**/*.java"],
        exclude = test_utils,
    ),
    # Expected runtime and resource requirements.
    size = "small",
    ...
)
```

The `size` attribute is used to determine the default timeout and resource
requirements. Refer to the [official documentation][bazel_test_size] for
details about test size and other common test attributes.

[bazel_test_size]: https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/common-definitions.html#common-attributes-tests

#### Executables

Java executables can be defined using the builtin `java_binary` rule. It will
generate a JAR and executable wrapper script that defines the classpath and
executes the Java runtime. Executable targets can be executed using the `bazel
run` command.

For example:

```
java_binary(
    name = "example",
    # The srcs attribute is optional.
    srcs = [ ... ],
    # The deps attribute is only allowed if srcs are specified.
    deps = [ ... ],
    # Name of the class that contains the entrypoint `main()`.
    # The main class can originate from srcs, deps, or runtime_deps.
    # A missing main class causes runtime failure.
    main_class = ...,
    # A list of flags to pass to the Java runtime.
    jvm_flags = [ ... ],
    # A list of files that should be present in the runtime path at runtime.
    data = [ ... ],
    ...
)
```

### Scala Targets

This section will outline how to define common Scala targets. Please refer to
the [Bazel API documentation][bazel-api-documentation] for further details.

This repository uses `rules_scala` to build Scala code in Bazel, which provides
rules such as `scala_library`, or `scala_test_suite`. Additionally, wrapper
macros are provided in `bazel_tools/scala.bzl`, such as `da_scala_library`, or
`da_scala_test_suite`. These apply common compiler flags, plugins, and linter
configuration. Please prefer the wrapper macros over the underlying
`rules_scala` rules.

If the project you are porting uses a different set of default flags, plugins,
etc., then see if these could be merged with the common defaults. The goal is
to converge on one shared set of common compiler flags.

#### Libraries

Scala libraries can be defined using the `da_scala_library` rule. It will
generate a JAR file containing the compiled Scala classes and a source JAR
containing the input Scala sources. For example:

```
load("//bazel_tools:scala.bzl", "da_scala_library")

da_scala_library(
    name = "example",
    # JAR dependencies for compiletime and runtime classpath
    deps = [
        "//some/package:some_target",
        ":some_local_target",
        ...
    ],
    # JAR dependencies for runtime class path only
    runtime_deps = [ ... ],
    # JAR dependencies that should be forwarded to anything that depends on this target.
    exports = [ ... ],
    # Scala source files
    srcs = glob(["src/main/java/.../my_component/**/*.scala"]),
    # Resource files
    resources = glob(["src/.../resources/**"]),
    # Keep target visibility tight.
    visibility = ["//current_component:__pkg__"],
    # Unused dependencies cause an error at build time.
    unused_dependency_checker_mode = "error",

    # If the library uses Scala macros you need to add the following attributes.
    scalacopts = ['-Xplugin-require:macroparadise'],
    plugins = [
        # Plugins have to be specified as JAR targets.
        '//external:jar/org/scalameta/paradise_2_12_6',
    ],
)
```

Strive to make library targets as small as possible. In a situation where
multiple Scala sources have no interdependencies you can use the
`da_scala_library_suite` macro to automatically generate one library target per
Scala source file, and bundle them in one target. This rule takes the same
attributes as `da_scala_library` with the exception of
`unused_dependency_checker_mode` which will always be disabled.

If a Scala library defines macros then you must use the
`da_scala_macro_library` rule instead of the above. Otherwise, you will encounter 
compiler errors of the following form (formatted for readability):

```
error: macro annotation could not be expanded (the most common reason
for that is that you need to enable the macro paradise plugin; another
possibility is that you try to use macro annotation in the same
compilation run that defines it)
```

#### Tests

Scala tests can be defined using the `da_scala_test` rule. It will generate an
executable wrapper around the given test code that executes the test runner's
main method. Test targets can be executed using the `bazel test` command.

Bazel can cache test results, which can greatly reduce test-suite execution
time. For maximum benefit test targets should be made as small as possible,
ideally a single Scala source file.

Use the `da_scala_test_suite` macro to automatically define one test target for
every given source file and bundle them in one test-suite target. If test-cases
depend on utility classes defined in other Scala sources, then you should
define a Scala library target for these utility classes and let the test
targets depend on this library.

For example:

```
load("//bazel_tools:scala.bzl", "da_scala_library", "da_scala_test_suite")

test_utils = glob(["src/test/scala/.../utils/**/*.scala"])

da_scala_library(
    name = "test-utils",
    srcs = test_utils,
    ...
)

da_scala_test_suite(
    name = "tests",
    srcs = glob(
        ["src/test/scala/**/*.scala"],
        exclude = test_utils,
    ),
    # Expected runtime and resource requirements.
    size = "small",
    ...
)
```

The `size` attribute is used to determine the default timeout and resource
requirements. Refer to the [official documentation][bazel_test_size] for
details about test size and other common test attributes.

#### Executables

Scala executables can be defined using the `da_scala_binary` rule. It will
generate a JAR and executable wrapper script that defines the classpath and
executes the Java runtime. Executable targets can be executed using the `bazel
run` command.

For example:

```
load("//bazel_tools:scala.bzl", "da_scala_binary")

da_scala_binary(
    name = "example",
    # The srcs attribute is optional.
    srcs = [ ... ],
    # The deps attribute is only allowed if srcs are specified.
    deps = [ ... ],
    # Name of the class that contains the entrypoint `main()`.
    # The main class can originate from srcs, deps, or runtime_deps.
    # A missing main class causes runtime failure.
    main_class = ...,
    # A list of flags to pass to the Java runtime.
    jvm_flags = [ ... ],
    # A list of files that should be present in the runtime path at runtime.
    data = [ ... ],
    ...
)
```

## SBT Plugins

If you are porting an SBT project to Bazel then you may encounter SBT plugins
that the project's build depends on, or that are important for developer
workflow, or project release. SBT's plugin mechanism is very flexible, and it
is not possible to describe a general procedure on how to port dependence on
any SBT plugin to Bazel.

In the following we list examples of SBT plugins that have been encountered and
ported to Bazel so far. If the SBT plugin you require has already been ported
to Bazel then you should be able to use the ported version in your project as
well. Otherwise, you should check if the plugin is similar to one of the
previously encountered plugins and port it in an analogous way.

### Built-In Bazel Features

It is worth checking whether the functionality provided by an SBT plugin is
already built into Bazel or a particular Bazel rule set. For instance, Bazel
has built-in support for generating dependency graphs, and `rules_scala` has
built-in support for generating deplyment JARs. Refer to the [user
guide][bazel_user_guide] for details.

### Compiler Plugins

Various SBT plugins make use of compiler plugins, or of components that can be
used as compiler plugins. `rules_scala` allows to define compiler plugins on
Scala targets. Therefore, such SBT plugins can be ported to Bazel by activating
the corresponding compiler plugin.

One example is the [wartremover plugin][wartremover_plugin], which provides
linting for Scala code. In the Bazel build the wartremover compiler plugin is
activated on all Scala targets by default. It is configured in the [Scala rule
wrappers][wartremover_config] used in the daml repository.

[wartremover_plugin]: https://github.com/wartremover/wartremover
[wartremover_config]: https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/blob/ea02814b343e4754c70a8718cb14657d6c51915f/bazel_tools/scala.bzl#L71

### Command-Line Tools

If an SBT plugin relies on a tool that can be called as a standalone
command-line application, then it can be ported to Bazel by defining a custom
rule that calls that command-line application.

For example, the [`scalafmt` Scala formatting checker][scalafmt] can be invoked
as a command-line tool. A custom Bazel rule
[`scala_format_test`][scala_format_test] is defined in the daml repository, that
generates a test-case that will run `scalafmt` on the specified Scala source
files.

[scalafmt]: https://github.com/scalameta/scalafmt
[scala_format_test]: https://github.com/DACH-NY/da/blob/e904c8eac1427633ef20b6106906a59f590de5a6/bazel_tools/scalafmt/scalafmt.bzl#L31

### DAML

The SBT build of the `ledger-client` component defines a custom SBT plugin for
handling DAML code. It covers compilation to LF, packaging to DAR, Scala code
generation, and executing the DAML sandbox. This plugin was ported to Bazel as
a set of custom Bazel rules defined in [`rules_daml`][rules_daml]. Refer to the
[user guide][bazel_user_guide] or the [API docs][bazel-api-documentation] for
details.

[rules_daml]: https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/tree/ea02814b343e4754c70a8718cb14657d6c51915f/rules_daml

## Java Runtime and Toolchain

Bazel is itself written in Java. By default Bazel will use its own Java runtime
and toolchain to build and execute JVM targets. At the time of writing the
Bazel executable provided in the dev-env uses the same Oracle JDK version 8 as
the rest of the dev-env.

Bazel supports specifying a different Java runtime and toolchain for JVM
targets via the rules `java_runtime` and `java_toolchain`. Refer to the
[official documentation][bazel_java_rules] for further information. Note, at
the time of writing the documentation does not display these rules, see [issue
6619][bazel_issue_6619]. They can be viewed on the [web
archive][bazel_java_rules_webarchive] instead.

[bazel_java_rules]: https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/java.html#java-rules
[bazel_issue_6619]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/6619
[bazel_java_rules_webarchive]: https://web.archive.org/web/20181021162843/https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/java.html

## Bazel API Documentation

[bazel-api-documentation]: #bazel-api-documentation

- The Bazel API documentation to Bazel rules defined in this repository can be
    viewed by executing the following command:
    ```
    $ bazel-api-docs
    ```
    And browsing to http://localhost:8000.
    See `bazel-api-docs -h` for further instructions.
- External Bazel rules API documentation is listed in the
    [official Bazel documentation][bazel_encyclopedia].

[bazel_encyclopedia]: https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/overview.html
