docs/source/ops/common-metrics.rst, before:

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Common Metrics
##############

The below sections contain the list of common metrics we expose for Daml services supporting a Prometheus metrics reporter.

For the metric types referenced below, see the `relevant Prometheus documentation <https://prometheus.io/docs/tutorials/understanding_metric_types/>`_.

gRPC Metrics
************
We expose the below metrics for all gRPC endpoints.
These metrics have the following common labels attached:

- **grpc_service_name**:
    fully qualified name of the gRPC service (e.g. ``com.daml.ledger.api.v1.ActiveContractsService``)

- **grpc_method_name**:
    name of the gRPC method (e.g. ``GetActiveContracts``)

- **grpc_client_type**:
    type of client connection (``unary`` or ``streaming``)

- **grpc_server_type**:
    type of server connection (``unary`` or ``streaming``)

- **service**:
    Canton service's name (e.g. ``participant``, ``sequencer``, etc.)

daml_grpc_server_duration_seconds
=================================
- **Description**: Distribution of the durations of serving gRPC requests.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_grpc_server_messages_sent_total
====================================
- **Description**: Total number of gRPC messages sent (on either type of connection).
- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_messages_received_total
========================================
- **Description**: Total number of gRPC messages received (on either type of connection).
- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_started_total
==============================
- **Description**: Total number of started gRPC requests (on either type of connection).
- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_handled_total
==============================
- **Description**: Total number of handled gRPC requests.
- **Labels**:

  - **grpc_code**: returned `gRPC status code <https://grpc.github.io/grpc/core/md_doc_statuscodes.html>`_ for the call (``OK``, ``CANCELLED``, ``INVALID_ARGUMENT``, etc.)

- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_messages_sent_bytes
====================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in gRPC messages sent (both unary and streaming).
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_grpc_server_messages_received_bytes
========================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in gRPC messages received (both unary and streaming).
- **Type**: Histogram

HTTP Metrics
************
We expose the below metrics for all HTTP endpoints.
These metrics have the following common labels attached:

- **http_verb**:
    HTTP verb used for a given call (e.g. ``GET`` or ``PUT``)

- **host**:
    fully qualified hostname of the HTTP endpoint (e.g. ``example.com``)

- **path**:
    path of the HTTP endpoint (e.g. ``/parties/create``)

- **service**:
    Daml service's name (``json-api`` for the HTTP JSON API Service)

daml_http_requests_duration_seconds
===================================
- **Description**: Distribution of the durations of serving HTTP requests.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_requests_total
========================
- **Description**: Total number of HTTP requests completed.
- **Labels**:

  - **http_status**: returned `HTTP status code <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes>`_ for the call

- **Type**: Counter

daml_http_websocket_messages_received_total
===========================================
- **Description**: Total number of WebSocket messages received.
- **Type**: Counter

daml_http_websocket_messages_sent_total
=======================================
- **Description**: Total number of WebSocket messages sent.
- **Type**: Counter

daml_http_requests_payload_bytes
================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in HTTP requests received.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_responses_payload_bytes
=================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in HTTP responses sent.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_websocket_messages_received_bytes
===========================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in WebSocket messages received.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_websocket_messages_sent_bytes
=======================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in WebSocket messages sent.
- **Type**: Histogram

Java Execution Service Metrics
******************************
We expose the below metrics for all execution services used by Daml components.
These metrics have the following common labels attached:

- **name**:
    The name of the executor service, that identifies its internal usage.

- **type**:
    The type of the execution service: currently we support `fork_join <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ForkJoinPool.html>`_ and `thread_pool <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ThreadPoolExecutor.html>`_.

daml_executor_pool_size
=======================
- **Description**: Number of worker threads present in the pool.
- **Type**: Gauge

daml_executor_pool_core
=======================
- **Description**: Core number of threads.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_pool_max
======================
- **Description**: Maximum allowed number of threads.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_pool_largest
==========================
- **Description**: Largest number of threads that have ever simultaneously been in the pool.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_threads_active
============================
- **Description**: Estimate of the number of threads that are executing tasks.
- **Type**: Gauge

daml_executor_threads_running
=============================
- **Description**: Estimate of the number of worker threads that are not blocked waiting to join tasks or for other managed synchronization.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `fork_join`

daml_executor_tasks_queued
==========================
- **Description**: Approximate number of tasks that are queued for execution.
- **Type**: Gauge

daml_executor_tasks_executing_queued
====================================
- **Description**: Estimate of the total number of tasks currently held in queues by worker threads (but not including tasks submitted to the pool that have not begun executing).
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `fork_join`

daml_executor_tasks_stolen
==========================
- **Description**: Estimate of the total number of completed tasks that were executed by a thread other than their submitter.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `fork_join`

daml_executor_tasks_submitted
=============================
- **Description**: Approximate total number of tasks that have ever been scheduled for execution.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_tasks_completed
=============================
- **Description**: Approximate total number of tasks that have completed execution.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_tasks_queue_remaining
===================================
- **Description**: Additional elements that this queue can ideally accept without blocking.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

Commit message:

Adds documentation for pruning metrics
CHANGELOG_BEGIN

CHANGELOG_END

docs/source/ops/common-metrics.rst, after:

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Common Metrics
##############

The following sections contain the list of common metrics we expose for Daml services supporting a Prometheus metrics reporter.

For the metric types referenced below, see the `relevant Prometheus documentation <https://prometheus.io/docs/tutorials/understanding_metric_types/>`_.

gRPC Metrics
************
We expose the following metrics for all gRPC endpoints.
These metrics have the following common labels attached:

- **grpc_service_name**:
    fully qualified name of the gRPC service (e.g. ``com.daml.ledger.api.v1.ActiveContractsService``)

- **grpc_method_name**:
    name of the gRPC method (e.g. ``GetActiveContracts``)

- **grpc_client_type**:
    type of client connection (``unary`` or ``streaming``)

- **grpc_server_type**:
    type of server connection (``unary`` or ``streaming``)

- **service**:
    Canton service's name (e.g. ``participant``, ``sequencer``, etc.)

daml_grpc_server_duration_seconds
=================================
- **Description**: Distribution of the durations of serving gRPC requests.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_grpc_server_messages_sent_total
====================================
- **Description**: Total number of gRPC messages sent (on either type of connection).
- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_messages_received_total
========================================
- **Description**: Total number of gRPC messages received (on either type of connection).
- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_started_total
==============================
- **Description**: Total number of started gRPC requests (on either type of connection).
- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_handled_total
==============================
- **Description**: Total number of handled gRPC requests.
- **Labels**:

  - **grpc_code**: returned `gRPC status code <https://grpc.github.io/grpc/core/md_doc_statuscodes.html>`_ for the call (``OK``, ``CANCELLED``, ``INVALID_ARGUMENT``, etc.)

- **Type**: Counter

daml_grpc_server_messages_sent_bytes
====================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in gRPC messages sent (both unary and streaming).
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_grpc_server_messages_received_bytes
========================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in gRPC messages received (both unary and streaming).
- **Type**: Histogram

HTTP Metrics
************
We expose the following metrics for all HTTP endpoints.
These metrics have the following common labels attached:

- **http_verb**:
    HTTP verb used for a given call (e.g. ``GET`` or ``PUT``)

- **host**:
    fully qualified hostname of the HTTP endpoint (e.g. ``example.com``)

- **path**:
    path of the HTTP endpoint (e.g. ``/parties/create``)

- **service**:
    Daml service's name (``json-api`` for the HTTP JSON API Service)

daml_http_requests_duration_seconds
===================================
- **Description**: Distribution of the durations of serving HTTP requests.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_requests_total
========================
- **Description**: Total number of HTTP requests completed.
- **Labels**:

  - **http_status**: returned `HTTP status code <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes>`_ for the call

- **Type**: Counter

daml_http_websocket_messages_received_total
===========================================
- **Description**: Total number of WebSocket messages received.
- **Type**: Counter

daml_http_websocket_messages_sent_total
=======================================
- **Description**: Total number of WebSocket messages sent.
- **Type**: Counter

daml_http_requests_payload_bytes
================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in HTTP requests received.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_responses_payload_bytes
=================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in HTTP responses sent.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_websocket_messages_received_bytes
===========================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in WebSocket messages received.
- **Type**: Histogram

daml_http_websocket_messages_sent_bytes
=======================================
- **Description**: Distribution of payload sizes in WebSocket messages sent.
- **Type**: Histogram

Java Execution Service Metrics
******************************
We expose the following metrics for all execution services used by Daml components.
These metrics have the following common labels attached:

- **name**:
    The name of the executor service, that identifies its internal usage.

- **type**:
    The type of the execution service: currently we support `fork_join <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ForkJoinPool.html>`_ and `thread_pool <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ThreadPoolExecutor.html>`_.

daml_executor_pool_size
=======================
- **Description**: Number of worker threads present in the pool.
- **Type**: Gauge

daml_executor_pool_core
=======================
- **Description**: Core number of threads.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_pool_max
======================
- **Description**: Maximum allowed number of threads.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_pool_largest
==========================
- **Description**: Largest number of threads that have ever simultaneously been in the pool.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_threads_active
============================
- **Description**: Estimate of the number of threads that are executing tasks.
- **Type**: Gauge

daml_executor_threads_running
=============================
- **Description**: Estimate of the number of worker threads that are not blocked waiting to join tasks or for other managed synchronization.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `fork_join`

daml_executor_tasks_queued
==========================
- **Description**: Approximate number of tasks that are queued for execution.
- **Type**: Gauge

daml_executor_tasks_executing_queued
====================================
- **Description**: Estimate of the total number of tasks currently held in queues by worker threads (but not including tasks submitted to the pool that have not begun executing).
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `fork_join`

daml_executor_tasks_stolen
==========================
- **Description**: Estimate of the total number of completed tasks that were executed by a thread other than their submitter.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `fork_join`

daml_executor_tasks_submitted
=============================
- **Description**: Approximate total number of tasks that have ever been scheduled for execution.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_tasks_completed
=============================
- **Description**: Approximate total number of tasks that have completed execution.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

daml_executor_tasks_queue_remaining
===================================
- **Description**: Additional elements that this queue can ideally accept without blocking.
- **Type**: Gauge
- **Observation**: Only available for `type` = `thread_pool`

Pruning metrics
***************

We expose the following metrics for all pruning processes. These metrics have the following common labels attached:

- **phase**:
    The name of the pruning phase being monitored

daml_services_pruning_prune_started_total
=========================================
- **Description**: Total number of started pruning processes.
- **Type**: Counter

daml_services_pruning_prune_completed_total
===========================================
- **Description**: Total number of completed pruning processes.
- **Type**: Counter
