docs/source/daml/reference/templates.rst, before:

.. Copyright (c) 2022 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Reference: Templates
####################

This page gives reference information on templates:

For the structure of a template, see :doc:`structure`.

.. _daml-ref-template-name:

Template Name
*************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template intro snippet
   :end-before: -- end template intro snippet

- This is the name of the template. It's preceded by ``template`` keyword. Must begin with a capital letter.
- This is the highest level of nesting.
- The name is used when :ref:`creating <daml-ref-create>` a contract of this template (usually, from within a choice).

.. _daml-ref-template-parameters:

Template Parameters
*******************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template params snippet
   :end-before: -- end template params snippet

- ``with`` keyword. The parameters are in the form of a :ref:`record type <daml-ref-record-types>`.
- Passed in when :ref:`creating <daml-ref-create>` a contract from this template. These are then in scope inside the template body.
- A template parameter can't have the same name as any :ref:`choice arguments <daml-ref-choice-arguments>` inside the template.
- For all parties involved in the contract (whether they're a ``signatory``, ``observer``, or ``controller``) you must pass them in as parameters to the contract, whether individually or as a list (``[Party]``).

.. _daml_ref-template-data:

Implicit Record
***************

Whenever a template is defined, a record is implicitly defined with the same
name and fields as that template. This record structure is used in Daml code to
represent the data of a contract based on that template.

Note that in the general case, the existence of a local binding ``b`` of type
``T``, where ``T`` is a template (and thus also a record), does not necessarily
imply the existence of a contract with the same data as ``b`` on the ledger.
You can only assume the existence of such a contract if ``b`` is the result of
a fetch from the ledger within the same transaction.

You can create a new instance of a record of type ``T`` without any interaction
with the ledger; in fact, this is how you construct a create command.

.. _daml_ref-template-this:

``this`` and ``self``
*********************

Within the body of a template we implicitly define a local binding ``this`` to
represent the data of the current contract. For a template ``T``, this binding
is of type ``T``, i.e. the implicit record defined by the template.

Within choices, you can additionally use the binding ``self`` to refer to the
contract ID of the current contract (the one on which the choice is being
executed). For a contract of template ``T``, the ``self`` binding is of type
``ContractId T``. 

.. _daml-ref-template-let:

Template-local Definitions
**************************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template let snippet
   :end-before: -- end template let snippet

- ``let`` keyword. Starts a block and is followed by any number of definitions, just like any other ``let`` block.
- Template parameters as well as ``this`` are in scope, but ``self`` is not.
- Definitions from the ``let`` block can be used anywhere else in the template's ``where`` block.

.. _daml-ref-signatories:

Signatory Parties
*****************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template sigs snippet
   :end-before: -- end template sigs snippet

- ``signatory`` keyword. After ``where``. Followed by at least one ``Party``.
- Signatories are the parties (see the ``Party`` type) who must consent to the creation of this contract. They are the parties who would be put into an *obligable position* when this contract is created.

  Daml won't let you put someone into an obligable position without their consent. So if the contract will cause obligations for a party, they *must* be a signatory. **If they haven't authorized it, you won't be able to create the contract.** In this situation, you may see errors like:

  ``NameOfTemplate requires authorizers Party1,Party2,Party, but only Party1 were given.``
- When a signatory consents to the contract creation, this means they also authorize the consequences of :ref:`choices <daml-ref-choices>` that can be exercised on this contract.
- The contract is visible to all signatories (as well as the other stakeholders of the contract). That is, the compiler automatically adds signatories as observers.
- Each template **must** have at least one signatory. A signatory declaration consists of the `signatory` keyword followed by a comma-separated list of one or more expressions, each expression denoting a ``Party`` or collection thereof.

.. _daml-ref-observers:

Observers
*********

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template obs snippet
   :end-before: -- end template obs snippet

- ``observer`` keyword. After ``where``. Followed by at least one ``Party``.
- Observers are additional stakeholders, so the contract is visible to these parties (see the ``Party`` type).
- Optional. You can have many, either as a comma-separated list or reusing the keyword. You could pass in a list (of type ``[Party]``).
- Use when a party needs visibility on a contract, or be informed or contract events, but is not a :ref:`signatory <daml-ref-signatories>` or :ref:`controller <daml-ref-controllers>`.
- If you start your choice with ``choice`` rather than ``controller`` (see :ref:`daml-ref-choices` below), you must make sure to add any potential controller as an observer. Otherwise, they will not be able to exercise the choice, because they won't be able to see the contract.

.. _daml-ref-choices:

Choices
*******

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template choice snippet
   :end-before: -- end template choice snippet

- A right that the contract gives the controlling party. Can be *exercised*.
- This is essentially where all the logic of the template goes.
- By default, choices are *consuming*: that is, exercising the choice archives the contract, so no further choices can be exercised on it. You can make a choice non-consuming using the ``nonconsuming`` keyword.
- There are two ways of specifying a choice: start with the ``choice`` keyword or start with the ``controller`` keyword.

  Starting with ``choice`` lets you pass in a ``Party`` to use as a controller. But you must make sure to add that party as an ``observer``.
- See :doc:`choices` for full reference information.

.. _daml-ref-agreements:

Agreements
**********

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template agree snippet
   :end-before: -- end template agree snippet

- ``agreement`` keyword, followed by text.
- Represents what the contract means in text. They're usually the boundary between on-ledger and off-ledger rights and obligations.
- Usually, they look like ``agreement tx``, where ``tx`` is of type ``Text``.

  You can use the built-in operator ``show`` to convert party names to a string, and concatenate with ``<>`` .

.. _daml-ref-preconditions:

Preconditions
*************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template ensure snippet
   :end-before: -- end template ensure snippet

- ``ensure`` keyword, followed by a boolean condition.
- Used on contract creation. ``ensure`` limits the values on parameters that can be passed to the contract: the contract can only be created if the boolean condition is true.

.. _daml-ref-contract-keys:

.. _daml-ref-maintainers:

Contract Keys and Maintainers
*****************************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start contract key snippet
   :end-before: -- end contract key snippet

- ``key`` and ``maintainer`` keywords.
- This feature lets you specify a "key" that you can use to uniquely identify this contract as an instance of this template.
- If you specify a ``key``, you must also specify a ``maintainer``. This is a ``Party`` that will ensure the uniqueness of all the keys it is aware of.

  Because of this, the ``key`` must include the ``maintainer`` ``Party`` or parties (for example, as part of a tuple or record), and the ``maintainer`` must be a signatory.
- For a full explanation, see :doc:`/daml/reference/contract-keys`.

Commit message:

Mention interface instances in 'Reference: Templates' docs (#15133)
* Rename {My=>NameOf}Template in Interface docs code snippets

* Mention interface instances in 'Reference: Templates' docs

changelog_begin
changelog_end

* Remove 'active development' warning for interfaces

The warning for _required_ interfaces stays

docs/source/daml/reference/templates.rst, after:

.. Copyright (c) 2022 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Reference: Templates
####################

This page gives reference information on templates:

For the structure of a template, see :doc:`structure`.

.. _daml-ref-template-name:

Template Name
*************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template intro snippet
   :end-before: -- end template intro snippet

- This is the name of the template. It's preceded by ``template`` keyword. Must begin with a capital letter.
- This is the highest level of nesting.
- The name is used when :ref:`creating <daml-ref-create>` a contract of this template (usually, from within a choice).

.. _daml-ref-template-parameters:

Template Parameters
*******************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template params snippet
   :end-before: -- end template params snippet

- ``with`` keyword. The parameters are in the form of a :ref:`record type <daml-ref-record-types>`.
- Passed in when :ref:`creating <daml-ref-create>` a contract from this template. These are then in scope inside the template body.
- A template parameter can't have the same name as any :ref:`choice arguments <daml-ref-choice-arguments>` inside the template.
- For all parties involved in the contract (whether they're a ``signatory``, ``observer``, or ``controller``) you must pass them in as parameters to the contract, whether individually or as a list (``[Party]``).

.. _daml_ref-template-data:

Implicit Record
***************

Whenever a template is defined, a record is implicitly defined with the same
name and fields as that template. This record structure is used in Daml code to
represent the data of a contract based on that template.

Note that in the general case, the existence of a local binding ``b`` of type
``T``, where ``T`` is a template (and thus also a record), does not necessarily
imply the existence of a contract with the same data as ``b`` on the ledger.
You can only assume the existence of such a contract if ``b`` is the result of
a fetch from the ledger within the same transaction.

You can create a new instance of a record of type ``T`` without any interaction
with the ledger; in fact, this is how you construct a create command.

.. _daml_ref-template-this:

``this`` and ``self``
*********************

Within the body of a template we implicitly define a local binding ``this`` to
represent the data of the current contract. For a template ``T``, this binding
is of type ``T``, i.e. the implicit record defined by the template.

Within choices, you can additionally use the binding ``self`` to refer to the
contract ID of the current contract (the one on which the choice is being
executed). For a contract of template ``T``, the ``self`` binding is of type
``ContractId T``.

.. _daml-ref-template-let:

Template-local Definitions
**************************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template let snippet
   :end-before: -- end template let snippet

- ``let`` keyword. Starts a block and is followed by any number of definitions, just like any other ``let`` block.
- Template parameters as well as ``this`` are in scope, but ``self`` is not.
- Definitions from the ``let`` block can be used anywhere else in the template's ``where`` block.

.. _daml-ref-signatories:

Signatory Parties
*****************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template sigs snippet
   :end-before: -- end template sigs snippet

- ``signatory`` keyword. After ``where``. Followed by at least one ``Party``.
- Signatories are the parties (see the ``Party`` type) who must consent to the creation of this contract. They are the parties who would be put into an *obligable position* when this contract is created.

  Daml won't let you put someone into an obligable position without their consent. So if the contract will cause obligations for a party, they *must* be a signatory. **If they haven't authorized it, you won't be able to create the contract.** In this situation, you may see errors like:

  ``NameOfTemplate requires authorizers Party1,Party2,Party, but only Party1 were given.``
- When a signatory consents to the contract creation, this means they also authorize the consequences of :ref:`choices <daml-ref-choices>` that can be exercised on this contract.
- The contract is visible to all signatories (as well as the other stakeholders of the contract). That is, the compiler automatically adds signatories as observers.
- Each template **must** have at least one signatory. A signatory declaration consists of the `signatory` keyword followed by a comma-separated list of one or more expressions, each expression denoting a ``Party`` or collection thereof.

.. _daml-ref-observers:

Observers
*********

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template obs snippet
   :end-before: -- end template obs snippet

- ``observer`` keyword. After ``where``. Followed by at least one ``Party``.
- Observers are additional stakeholders, so the contract is visible to these parties (see the ``Party`` type).
- Optional. You can have many, either as a comma-separated list or reusing the keyword. You could pass in a list (of type ``[Party]``).
- Use when a party needs visibility on a contract, or be informed or contract events, but is not a :ref:`signatory <daml-ref-signatories>` or :ref:`controller <daml-ref-controllers>`.
- If you start your choice with ``choice`` rather than ``controller`` (see :ref:`daml-ref-choices` below), you must make sure to add any potential controller as an observer. Otherwise, they will not be able to exercise the choice, because they won't be able to see the contract.

.. _daml-ref-choices:

Choices
*******

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template choice snippet
   :end-before: -- end template choice snippet

- A right that the contract gives the controlling party. Can be *exercised*.
- This is essentially where all the logic of the template goes.
- By default, choices are *consuming*: that is, exercising the choice archives the contract, so no further choices can be exercised on it. You can make a choice non-consuming using the ``nonconsuming`` keyword.
- There are two ways of specifying a choice: start with the ``choice`` keyword or start with the ``controller`` keyword.

  Starting with ``choice`` lets you pass in a ``Party`` to use as a controller. But you must make sure to add that party as an ``observer``.
- See :doc:`choices` for full reference information.

.. _daml-ref-agreements:

Agreements
**********

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template agree snippet
   :end-before: -- end template agree snippet

- ``agreement`` keyword, followed by text.
- Represents what the contract means in text. They're usually the boundary between on-ledger and off-ledger rights and obligations.
- Usually, they look like ``agreement tx``, where ``tx`` is of type ``Text``.

  You can use the built-in operator ``show`` to convert party names to a string, and concatenate with ``<>`` .

.. _daml-ref-preconditions:

Preconditions
*************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start template ensure snippet
   :end-before: -- end template ensure snippet

- ``ensure`` keyword, followed by a boolean condition.
- Used on contract creation. ``ensure`` limits the values on parameters that can be passed to the contract: the contract can only be created if the boolean condition is true.

.. _daml-ref-contract-keys:

.. _daml-ref-maintainers:

Contract Keys and Maintainers
*****************************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Reference.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- start contract key snippet
   :end-before: -- end contract key snippet

- ``key`` and ``maintainer`` keywords.
- This feature lets you specify a "key" that you can use to uniquely identify this contract as an instance of this template.
- If you specify a ``key``, you must also specify a ``maintainer``. This is a ``Party`` that will ensure the uniqueness of all the keys it is aware of.

  Because of this, the ``key`` must include the ``maintainer`` ``Party`` or parties (for example, as part of a tuple or record), and the ``maintainer`` must be a signatory.
- For a full explanation, see :doc:`/daml/reference/contract-keys`.

Interface Instances
*******************

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets-dev/Interfaces.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IN_TEMPLATE_BEGIN
   :end-before: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IN_TEMPLATE_END

- Used to make a template an instance of an existing interface.
- The clause must start with the keywords ``interface instance``, followed by
  the name of the interface, then the keyword ``for`` and the name of the
  template (which must match the enclosing declaration), and finally the keyword
  ``where``, which introduces a block where **all** the methods of the interface
  must be implemented.
- See :doc:`interfaces` for full reference information on interfaces, or
  section :ref:`interface-instances` for interface instances specifically.
