docs/source/daml/reference/updates.rst, before:

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Reference: Updates
##################

This page gives reference information on Updates. For the structure around them, see :doc:`structure`.

.. _daml-ref-updates-background:

Background
**********

- An ``Update`` is ledger update. There are many different kinds of these, and they're listed below.
- They are what can go in a :ref:`choice body <daml-ref-choice-body>`.

.. _daml-ref-binding-variables:

Binding Variables
*****************

.. code-block:: daml

   boundVariable <- UpdateExpression1

- One of the things you can do in a choice body is bind (assign) an Update expression to a variable. This works for any of the Updates below.

.. _daml-ref-do:

do
***

.. code-block:: daml

   do
      updateExpression1
      updateExpression2

- ``do`` can be used to group ``Update`` expressions. You can only have one update expression in a choice, so any choice beyond the very simple will use a ``do`` block.
- Anything you can put into a choice body, you can put into a ``do`` block.
- By default, ``do`` returns whatever is returned by the **last expression in the block**.

  So if you want to return something else, you'll need to use ``return`` explicitly - see :ref:`daml-ref-return` for an example.

.. _daml-ref-create:

archive
*******

.. code-block:: daml

   archive ContractId

- ``archive`` function.
- Archives a contract already created and residing on the ledger. The contract is fetched by its unique contract identifier ``ContractId <name of template>``.
- Returns a transaction id on success.
- Requires authorization from the contract controllers/signatories. Without the required authorization, the transaction fails. For more detail on authorization, see :ref:`daml-ref-signatories`.

.. _daml-ref-archive:

create
******

.. code-block:: daml

   create NameOfTemplate with exampleParameters

- ``create`` function.
- Creates a contract on the ledger. When a contract is committed to the ledger, it is given a unique contract identifier of type ``ContractId <name of template>``.
- Creating the contract returns that ``ContractId``.
- Use ``with`` to specify the template parameters.
- Requires authorization from the signatories of the contract being created. This is given by being signatories of the contract from which the other contract is created, being the controller, or explicitly creating the contract itself.

  If the required authorization is not given, the transaction fails. For more detail on authorization, see :ref:`daml-ref-signatories`.

.. _daml-ref-exercise:

exercise
********

.. code-block:: daml

   exercise IdOfContract NameOfChoiceOnContract with choiceArgument1 = value1

- ``exercise`` function.
- Exercises the specified choice on the specified contract.
- Use ``with`` to specify the choice parameters.
- Requires authorization from the controller(s) of the choice. If the authorization is not given, the transaction fails.

.. _daml-ref-exercise-by-key:

exerciseByKey
*************

.. code-block:: daml

   exerciseByKey @ContractType contractKey NameOfChoiceOnContract with choiceArgument1 = value1

- ``exerciseByKey`` function.
- Exercises the specified choice on the specified contract.
- Use ``with`` to specify the choice parameters.
- Requires authorization from the controller(s) of the choice **and** from at least one of the maintainers of the key. If the authorization is not given, the transaction fails.

.. _daml-ref-fetch:

fetch
*****

.. code-block:: daml

   fetchedContract <- fetch IdOfContract

- ``fetch`` function.
- Fetches the contract with that ID. Usually used with a bound variable, as in the example above.
- Often used to check the details of a contract before exercising a choice on that contract. Also used when referring to some reference data.
- ``fetch cid`` fails if ``cid`` is not the contract id of an active contract, and thus causes the entire transaction to abort.
- The submitting party must be an observer or signatory on the contract, otherwise ``fetch`` fails, and similarly causes the entire transaction to abort.

.. _daml-ref-fetch-by-key:

fetchByKey
**********

.. code-block:: daml

   fetchedContract <- fetchByKey @ContractType contractKey

- ``fetchByKey`` function.
- The same as ``fetch``, but fetches the contract with that :doc:`contract key </daml/reference/contract-keys>`, instead of the contract ID.
- Like ``fetch``, ``fetchByKey`` needs to be authorized by at least one stakeholder of the contract.
- Fails if no contract can be found.

.. _daml-ref-lookup-by-key:

lookupByKey
***********

.. code-block:: daml

   fetchedContractId <- lookupByKey @ContractType contractKey

- ``lookupByKey`` function.
- Use this to confirm that a contract with the given :doc:`contract key </daml/reference/contract-keys>` exists.
- If the submitting party is a stakeholder of a matching contract, ``lookupByKey`` returns the ``ContractId`` of the contract; otherwise, it returns ``None``. Transactions may fail due to contention because the key changes between the lookup and committing the transaction, or becasue the submitter didn't know about the existence of a matching contract.
- **All** of the maintainers of the key must authorize the lookup (by either being signatories or by submitting the command to lookup).

.. _daml-ref-abort:

abort
*****

.. code-block:: daml

   abort errorMessage

- ``abort`` function.
- Fails the transaction - nothing in it will be committed to the ledger.
- ``errorMessage`` is of type ``Text``. Use the error message to provide more context to an external system (e.g., it gets displayed in Daml Studio script results).
- You could use ``assert False`` as an alternative.

.. _daml-ref-assert:

assert
******

.. code-block:: daml

   assert (condition == True)

- ``assert`` keyword.
- Fails the transaction if the condition is false. So the choice can only be exercised if the boolean expression evaluates to ``True``.
- Often used to restrict the arguments that can be supplied to a contract choice.

Here's an example of using ``assert`` to prevent a choice being exercised if the ``Party`` passed as a parameter is on a blacklist:

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/RestrictedPayout.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- BEGIN_CHOICE_WITH_ASSERT
   :end-before: -- END_CHOICE_WITH_ASSERT

.. _daml-ref-gettime:

getTime
*******

.. code-block:: daml

   currentTime <- getTime

- ``getTime`` keyword.
- Gets the ledger time. (You will usually want to immediately bind it to a variable in order to be able to access the value.)
- Used to restrict when a choice can be made. For example, with an ``assert`` that the time is later than a certain time.

Here's an example of a choice that uses a check on the current time:

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Snippets.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- BEGIN_CHOICE_WITH_TIME_CHECK
   :end-before: -- END_CHOICE_WITH_TIME_CHECK

.. _daml-ref-return:

return
******

.. code-block:: daml

   return ()

- ``return`` keyword.
- Used to return a value from ``do`` block that is not of type ``Update``.

Here's an example where two contracts are created in a choice and both their ids are returned as a tuple:

.. code-block:: daml

   do
     firstContract <- create SomeContractTemplate with arg1; arg2
     secondContract <- create SomeContractTemplate with arg1; arg2
     return (firstContract, secondContract)

.. _daml-ref-let-update:

let
***

See the documentation on :ref:`daml-ref-let`.

Let looks similar to binding variables, but it's very different! This code example shows how:

.. code-block:: daml

  do
    -- defines a function, createdContract, taking a single argument that when
    -- called _will_ create the new contract using argument for issuer and owner
    let createContract x = create NameOfContract with issuer = x; owner = x

    createContract party1
    createContract party2

.. _daml-ref-this:

this
****

``this`` lets you refer to the current contract from within the choice body. This refers to the contract, *not* the contract ID.

It's useful, for example, if you want to pass the current contract to a helper function outside the template.

Commit message:

including extra statement about implicit Archive choice

docs/source/daml/reference/updates.rst, after:

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Reference: Updates
##################

This page gives reference information on Updates. For the structure around them, see :doc:`structure`.

.. _daml-ref-updates-background:

Background
**********

- An ``Update`` is ledger update. There are many different kinds of these, and they're listed below.
- They are what can go in a :ref:`choice body <daml-ref-choice-body>`.

.. _daml-ref-binding-variables:

Binding Variables
*****************

.. code-block:: daml

   boundVariable <- UpdateExpression1

- One of the things you can do in a choice body is bind (assign) an Update expression to a variable. This works for any of the Updates below.

.. _daml-ref-do:

do
***

.. code-block:: daml

   do
      updateExpression1
      updateExpression2

- ``do`` can be used to group ``Update`` expressions. You can only have one update expression in a choice, so any choice beyond the very simple will use a ``do`` block.
- Anything you can put into a choice body, you can put into a ``do`` block.
- By default, ``do`` returns whatever is returned by the **last expression in the block**.

  So if you want to return something else, you'll need to use ``return`` explicitly - see :ref:`daml-ref-return` for an example.

.. _daml-ref-create:

archive
*******

.. code-block:: daml

   archive ContractId

- ``archive`` function.
- Archives a contract already created and residing on the ledger. The contract is fetched by its unique contract identifier ``ContractId <name of template>``.
- Returns a transaction id on success.
- Requires authorization from the contract controllers/signatories. Without the required authorization, the transaction fails. For more detail on authorization, see :ref:`daml-ref-signatories`.

- All templates implicitly have an `Archive` choice that cannot be removed, which is equivalent to:
.. code-block:: daml

   choice Archive : ()
     controller (signatory this)
     do return ()

.. _daml-ref-archive:

create
******

.. code-block:: daml

   create NameOfTemplate with exampleParameters

- ``create`` function.
- Creates a contract on the ledger. When a contract is committed to the ledger, it is given a unique contract identifier of type ``ContractId <name of template>``.
- Creating the contract returns that ``ContractId``.
- Use ``with`` to specify the template parameters.
- Requires authorization from the signatories of the contract being created. This is given by being signatories of the contract from which the other contract is created, being the controller, or explicitly creating the contract itself.

  If the required authorization is not given, the transaction fails. For more detail on authorization, see :ref:`daml-ref-signatories`.

.. _daml-ref-exercise:

exercise
********

.. code-block:: daml

   exercise IdOfContract NameOfChoiceOnContract with choiceArgument1 = value1

- ``exercise`` function.
- Exercises the specified choice on the specified contract.
- Use ``with`` to specify the choice parameters.
- Requires authorization from the controller(s) of the choice. If the authorization is not given, the transaction fails.

.. _daml-ref-exercise-by-key:

exerciseByKey
*************

.. code-block:: daml

   exerciseByKey @ContractType contractKey NameOfChoiceOnContract with choiceArgument1 = value1

- ``exerciseByKey`` function.
- Exercises the specified choice on the specified contract.
- Use ``with`` to specify the choice parameters.
- Requires authorization from the controller(s) of the choice **and** from at least one of the maintainers of the key. If the authorization is not given, the transaction fails.

.. _daml-ref-fetch:

fetch
*****

.. code-block:: daml

   fetchedContract <- fetch IdOfContract

- ``fetch`` function.
- Fetches the contract with that ID. Usually used with a bound variable, as in the example above.
- Often used to check the details of a contract before exercising a choice on that contract. Also used when referring to some reference data.
- ``fetch cid`` fails if ``cid`` is not the contract id of an active contract, and thus causes the entire transaction to abort.
- The submitting party must be an observer or signatory on the contract, otherwise ``fetch`` fails, and similarly causes the entire transaction to abort.

.. _daml-ref-fetch-by-key:

fetchByKey
**********

.. code-block:: daml

   fetchedContract <- fetchByKey @ContractType contractKey

- ``fetchByKey`` function.
- The same as ``fetch``, but fetches the contract with that :doc:`contract key </daml/reference/contract-keys>`, instead of the contract ID.
- Like ``fetch``, ``fetchByKey`` needs to be authorized by at least one stakeholder of the contract.
- Fails if no contract can be found.

.. _daml-ref-lookup-by-key:

lookupByKey
***********

.. code-block:: daml

   fetchedContractId <- lookupByKey @ContractType contractKey

- ``lookupByKey`` function.
- Use this to confirm that a contract with the given :doc:`contract key </daml/reference/contract-keys>` exists.
- If the submitting party is a stakeholder of a matching contract, ``lookupByKey`` returns the ``ContractId`` of the contract; otherwise, it returns ``None``. Transactions may fail due to contention because the key changes between the lookup and committing the transaction, or becasue the submitter didn't know about the existence of a matching contract.
- **All** of the maintainers of the key must authorize the lookup (by either being signatories or by submitting the command to lookup).

.. _daml-ref-abort:

abort
*****

.. code-block:: daml

   abort errorMessage

- ``abort`` function.
- Fails the transaction - nothing in it will be committed to the ledger.
- ``errorMessage`` is of type ``Text``. Use the error message to provide more context to an external system (e.g., it gets displayed in Daml Studio script results).
- You could use ``assert False`` as an alternative.

.. _daml-ref-assert:

assert
******

.. code-block:: daml

   assert (condition == True)

- ``assert`` keyword.
- Fails the transaction if the condition is false. So the choice can only be exercised if the boolean expression evaluates to ``True``.
- Often used to restrict the arguments that can be supplied to a contract choice.

Here's an example of using ``assert`` to prevent a choice being exercised if the ``Party`` passed as a parameter is on a blacklist:

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/RestrictedPayout.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- BEGIN_CHOICE_WITH_ASSERT
   :end-before: -- END_CHOICE_WITH_ASSERT

.. _daml-ref-gettime:

getTime
*******

.. code-block:: daml

   currentTime <- getTime

- ``getTime`` keyword.
- Gets the ledger time. (You will usually want to immediately bind it to a variable in order to be able to access the value.)
- Used to restrict when a choice can be made. For example, with an ``assert`` that the time is later than a certain time.

Here's an example of a choice that uses a check on the current time:

.. literalinclude:: ../code-snippets/Snippets.daml
   :language: daml
   :start-after: -- BEGIN_CHOICE_WITH_TIME_CHECK
   :end-before: -- END_CHOICE_WITH_TIME_CHECK

.. _daml-ref-return:

return
******

.. code-block:: daml

   return ()

- ``return`` keyword.
- Used to return a value from ``do`` block that is not of type ``Update``.

Here's an example where two contracts are created in a choice and both their ids are returned as a tuple:

.. code-block:: daml

   do
     firstContract <- create SomeContractTemplate with arg1; arg2
     secondContract <- create SomeContractTemplate with arg1; arg2
     return (firstContract, secondContract)

.. _daml-ref-let-update:

let
***

See the documentation on :ref:`daml-ref-let`.

Let looks similar to binding variables, but it's very different! This code example shows how:

.. code-block:: daml

  do
    -- defines a function, createdContract, taking a single argument that when
    -- called _will_ create the new contract using argument for issuer and owner
    let createContract x = create NameOfContract with issuer = x; owner = x

    createContract party1
    createContract party2

.. _daml-ref-this:

this
****

``this`` lets you refer to the current contract from within the choice body. This refers to the contract, *not* the contract ID.

It's useful, for example, if you want to pass the current contract to a helper function outside the template.
