# Release of Daml SDK 3.3.0

## What’s New

### Smart Contract Upgrading

The Smart Contract Upgrade feature enables fixing application bugs or extending Daml models is possible without downtime
or breaking Daml clients. It was introduced in Daml v2.9.1 and is now available in Daml and Canton 3.3.

This feature is well-suited for developing and rolling out incremental template updates. There are guidelines to ensure
upgrade compatibility between DAR files. The compatibility is checked at compile time, DAR upload time, and runtime.
This is to ensure data backwards compatibility and forward compatibility (subject to the guidelines being followed)
so that DARs can be safely upgraded to new versions. It also prevents unexpected data loss if a runtime downgrade occurs
(e.g., a ledger client is using template version 1.0.0 while the participant node has the newer version 1.1.0).

### Time boundaries functions

Time boundaries functions allow constructing time assertions in Daml that are valid over a long period of time.
- Ledger time bound checking predicates: ``isLedgerTimeLT``, ``isLedgerTimeLE``, ``isLedgerTimeGT`` and ``isLedgerTimeGE``
- Ledger time deadline assertions: ``assertWithinDeadline`` and ``assertDeadlineExceeded``.

### Crypto primitives

New crypto primitives simplify manipulation of data encoded into hex strings and introduce routines to calculate
hashes and validate signatures over a block of encoded data.
- Introduced Daml data type ``BytesHex`` supported via type classes ``HasToHex`` and ``HasFromHex``.
- ``BytesHex`` support for base 16 encoded byte strings: ``isHex``, ``byteCount``, ``packHexBytes`` and ``sliceHexBytes``
- ``Bytes32Hex`` support for base 16 encoded byte strings of length 32: ``isBytes32Hex``, ``minBytes32Hex`` and 
``maxBytes32Hex``.
- ``UInt32Hex`` support for base 16 encoded byte strings representing UInt32: ``isUInt32Hex``, ``minUInt32Hex`` and
``maxUInt32Hex``.
- ``UInt64Hex`` support for base 16 encoded byte strings representing UInt64: ``isUInt64Hex``, ``minUInt64Hex`` and
``maxUInt64Hex``.
- ``UInt256Hex`` support for base 16 encoded byte strings representing UInt256: ``isUInt256Hex``, ``minUInt256Hex`` and
``maxUInt256Hex``.
- ``keccak256`` support creation of KECCAK256 hash of the UTF8 bytes.
- ``secp256k1`` support validation the SECP256K1 signature given a hex encoded message and a hex encoded DER formatted
public key.

## Breaking Changes

## Functional Changes

### Daml Script

- ``allocatePartyWithHint`` has been deprecated and replaced with ``allocatePartyByHint``. Parties can no longer have
a display name that differs from the ``PartyHint``.  
- ``daml-script`` is now a utility package: the datatypes it defines
cannot be used as template or choice parameters, and it is transparent to upgrades. It is strongly discouraged to upload
``daml-script`` to a production ledger but this change ensures that it is harmless. 
- The ``daml-script`` library in Daml 3.3 is Daml 3’s name for ``daml-script-lts`` in Canton 2.10 (renamed from
``daml3-script`` in 3.2). The old ``daml-script`` library of Canton 3.2 no longer exists.
- ``daml-script`` exposes a new
``prefetchKey`` option for submissions. See here.

### Standard library changes

- New ``Bounded`` instances for ``Numeric`` and ``Time``.
- ``TextMap`` is no longer deprecated
- Added ``Map.singleton`` and ``TextMap.singleton`` functions.
- Added ``List.mapWithIndex``.
- Added ``Functor.<$$>``.
- Added ``Text.isNotEmpty``.

### Language changes

- New alternative syntax for implementing interfaces: one can now write implements ``I where ...``
instead of ``interface instance I for T where ...``


### Daml assistant changes

- Fixed an issue with ``daml build –all`` failing to find ``multi-package.yaml`` when in a directory below a ``daml.yaml``
- The ``daml package`` and ``daml merge-dars`` commands no longer exist.
- The ``daml start`` command no longer supports hot reload as this feature is incompatible with Smart Contract Upgrades.
- Added a new multi-package project template called ``multi-package-example`` to the daml assistant.

### Daml compiler changes

- The compiler now emits warnings for unused dependencies.
- Added flags for turning warnings about expressions into errors.
- The ``bad-{exceptions,interface-instances}`` and ``warn-large-tuples`` flags no longer exist.

### Code generation changes

- In typescript-generated code, ``undefined`` is now accepted by functions expecting an optional value and is understood
to mean ``None``.
- Typescript code generation no longer emits code for utility packages: these packages don’t expose any serializable
type and thus will never be interacted with through the ledger API.
- Java codegen now exposes additional fields in the class representing an interface. Next to ``TEMPLATE_ID`` there is
``INTERFACE_ID`` and next to ``TEMPLATE_ID_WITH_PACKAGE_ID`` there is ``INTERFACE_ID_WITH_PACKAGE_ID``. Both field pairs
contain the same value.

### Miscellaneous

- The Daml SDK is now compiled against open JDK 17
- Added transaction traces
