daml-script/test/daml/upgrades/README.md, before:

# Writing upgrades tests here
This suite allows for small, self contained runtime upgrades tests written with daml-script.  
It provides a mechanism for generating upgraded dars within the daml test file using comments.

## Generated packages
Each test module can have one or more `PACKAGE` definitions in the following format:
```
{- PACKAGE
name: <the-package-name>
versions: <number of versions to create as an int, will generate 1.0.0, 2.0.0, ..., n.0.0>
modules:
  - name: <Name.Of.The.Module>
    contents: |
      <write daml code here>
  - name: <Another.Module>
    contents: |
      <more daml code here>
-}
```
NOTE: The package-name must be unique across all upgrades tests, so choose something similar to your test file name.


The contents of each module can use a versioned pragma syntax to include subsets of code in a specific version.  
The syntax for this is `V1(some code)` .. `Vn(some code)`. For example
```
template Upgraded with
    p: Party
    V2(anotherField: Optional Int)
    fieldThatChangesType: V1(Int)V2(Text)
  where
    signatory p
```
NOTE: hpp will often struggle if your macro (`V1(<code>)`) body starts with whitespace, to avoid putting your indentation within the body.
In most cases, lines containing only whitespace will be ignored. Similarly, multiline macros do not always work, so consider one macro per line.

With these comments, the modules can be imported via modules prefixes. Each module path will be prefixed with `V1` .. `Vn` for importing.  
i.e.
```
import qualified V1.Name.Of.The.Module as V1
import qualified V2.Name.Of.The.Module as V2
```

## UpgradeTestLib
It is expected that all daml script test files import the `UpgradeTestLib` module, which will transitively import daml3-script and various assertion/utility modules.  
This testing module exposes the `tests` function as such  
```
tests : [(Text, Script ())] -> Script ()
```
This is used to define your list of named tests. Each test file will run a top level `main : Script ()` function, so the usual formula is
```
main : Script ()
main = tests
  [ ("some test", someTest)
  , ("some other test", someOtherTest)
  ]

someTest : Script ()
someTest = ...

someOtherTest : Script ()
someOtherTest = ...
```

Given upgrades is work in progress, we also expose `broken : (Text, Script ()) -> (Text, Script ())`, which can be used to wrap the test cases in the `main` definition. This will tag the test with `(BROKEN)` and ensure it fails.
```
main : Script ()
main = tests
  [ ("some test", someTest)
  , broken ("oops", someOtherTest)
  ]
```

Finally, we provide some utilities for unvetting dars in tests.
```
withUnvettedDar : Text -> Script a -> Script a
withUnvettedDarOnParticipant : Text -> ParticipantName -> Script a -> Script a
participant0 : ParticipantName
participant1 : ParticipantName
```
These allow running a computation with a dar unvetted, and handle re-vetting the dar afterwards, even in the case of failure. The first `Text` field is the dar names discussed in the Generated packages section, i.e. `my-package-1.0.0`.  
Avoid using the daml3-script internal vetting primitives, and use these functions instead.

Commit message:

Decouple MODULE definitions from PACKAGEs

daml-script/test/daml/upgrades/README.md, after:

# Writing upgrades tests here
This suite allows for small, self contained runtime upgrades tests written with daml-script.  
It provides a mechanism for generating upgraded dars within the daml test file using comments.

## Generated packages
Each test module can have one or more `PACKAGE` definitions in the following format:
```
{- PACKAGE
name: <the-package-name>
versions: <number of versions to create as an int, will generate 1.0.0, 2.0.0, ..., n.0.0>
-}
```

as well as one or more `MODULE` definitions in the following format:
```
{- MODULE
package: <a-package-name>
contents: |
  module <Name.Of.The.Module> where
  <write daml code here>
-}
```

NOTES:
  * The `name` of a `PACKAGE` must be unique across all upgrades tests, so choose something similar to your test file name.
  * If the `package` of a `MODULE` definition does not match any `PACKAGE` definition, it will be ignored.
  * The module name is extracted from the `contents`, so it must contain the line `module <Name.Of.The.Module> where` somewhere.
    * Version comments (see below) are processed before extracting the module name, allowing for module name changes across versions.
  * If multiple `MODULE` definitions use the same module name, the test suite will crash.

The contents of each module can use a version comment syntax to include subsets of code in a specific version.
The syntax for this is `<some code> -- @V <space separated versions>`. For example
```
template Upgraded with
    p: Party
    anotherField: Optional Int -- @V  2
    fieldThatChangesType: Int  -- @V 1
    fieldThatChangesType: Text -- @V  2
  where
    signatory p
```

With these comments, the modules can be imported via modules prefixes. Each module path will be prefixed with `V1` .. `Vn` for importing.  
i.e.
```
import qualified V1.Name.Of.The.Module as V1
import qualified V2.Name.Of.The.Module as V2
```

## UpgradeTestLib
It is expected that all daml script test files import the `UpgradeTestLib` module, which will transitively import daml3-script and various assertion/utility modules.  
This testing module exposes the `tests` function as such  
```
tests : [(Text, Script ())] -> Script ()
```
This is used to define your list of named tests. Each test file will run a top level `main : Script ()` function, so the usual formula is
```
main : Script ()
main = tests
  [ ("some test", someTest)
  , ("some other test", someOtherTest)
  ]

someTest : Script ()
someTest = ...

someOtherTest : Script ()
someOtherTest = ...
```

Given upgrades is work in progress, we also expose `broken : (Text, Script ()) -> (Text, Script ())`, which can be used to wrap the test cases in the `main` definition. This will tag the test with `(BROKEN)` and ensure it fails.
```
main : Script ()
main = tests
  [ ("some test", someTest)
  , broken ("oops", someOtherTest)
  ]
```

Finally, we provide some utilities for unvetting dars in tests.
```
withUnvettedDar : Text -> Script a -> Script a
withUnvettedDarOnParticipant : Text -> ParticipantName -> Script a -> Script a
participant0 : ParticipantName
participant1 : ParticipantName
```
These allow running a computation with a dar unvetted, and handle re-vetting the dar afterwards, even in the case of failure. The first `Text` field is the dar names discussed in the Generated packages section, i.e. `my-package-1.0.0`.
Avoid using the daml3-script internal vetting primitives, and use these functions instead.
